There a several key principles in object oriented programming which span across R’s object systems and other programming languages. The first are the ideas of a class and an object. The world is made up of physical objects - the chair you’re sitting in, the clock next to your bed, the bus you ride every day, etc. Just like the world is full of physical objects, your programs can be made of objects as well. A class is a blueprint for an object: it describes the parts of an object, how to make an object, and what the object is able to do. If you were to think about a class for a bus (as in the public buses that roam the roads) this class would describe attributes for the bus like the number of seats on the bus, the number of windows, the top speed of the bus, and the maximum distance the bus can drive on one tank of gas.

Buses in general can perform the same actions, and these actions are also described in the class: a bus can open and close its doors, the bus can steer, and the accelerator or the brake can be used to slow down or speed up the bus. Each of these actions can be described as a method which is a function that is associated with a particular class. We’ll be using this class in order to create individual bus objects, so we should provide a constructor which is a method where we can specify attributes of the bus as arguments. This constructor method will then return an individual bus object with the attributes that we specified.

You could also imagine that after making the bus class you might want to make a special kind of class for a party bus. Party buses have all of the same attributes and methods as our bus class, but they also have additional attributes and methods like the number of refrigerators, window blinds that can be opened and closed, and smoke machines that can be turned on and off. Instead of rewriting the entire bus class and then adding new attributes and methods, it is possible for the party bus class to inherit all of the attributes and methods from the bus class. In this framework of inheritance, we talk about the bus class as the super-class of the party bus, and the party bus is the sub-class of the bus. What this relationship means is that the party bus has all of the same attributes and methods as the bus class plus additional attributes and methods.